# Updraft velocity emulators

Codes for training, testing and evaluating different Gaussian Process Emulators (GPEs) for predicting cloud base updraft velocities.

Tomi Raatikainen  
Finnish Meteorological Institute, Helsinki, Finland  
tomi.raatikainen@fmi.fi  
June 9, 2026


## Description

The training data is generated using UCLALES-SALSA large-eddy simulation model (<https://github.com/UCLALES-SALSA/UCLALES-SALSA>). The GPE codes are originally from <https://github.com/ots22/gpf>, but modified for our cases. LES or the initial emulator development work are not descibed here, but for the previous emulator development work, see Ahola et al. (2022) and Nordling et al. (2024).

## Emulator training inputs (./bin/)

Four different emulator training input files (and emulators) are currently available:

1. DATA\_merge\_w (emulator **N24**):
Combined separate day and night input files from Nordling et al. (2024) into a single file. Cosine of the solar zenith angle is set to zero for night. The updraft velocity is the average of positive (updraft) cloud base vertical velocities from the last hour of each 3.5 h simulation presented by Ahola et al. (2022).

2. DATA\_wp.dat (emulator **J25**):
Input data file for emulator developed on January 2025. Vertical velocity in DATA_wp.dat is the average of positive cloud base vertical velocities (wp).

3. DATA\_ws\_Sc.dat (emulator **Sc_J26**):
Input data file for Stratocumulus emulator developed on January 2026. Vertical velocity is the standard deviation (sigma or ws) of the assumed Gaussian vertical velocity distribution distribution. This is calculated from the orignal average of positive cloud base vertical velocities (see below).

4. DATA\_Noora\_ws.dat (emulator **H26**):
Input data file generated by Noora Hyttinen (2026). Vertical velocity is the standard deviation (ws).

When the mean velocity is zero and the distribution is symmetric, wp=sum(w)/N=sum(w-w\_avg)/N=AAD=sigma\_w\*sqrt(2/pi) <br>
=> sigma\_w=wp\*sqrt(pi/2)=wp\*1.25331


## Previously calculated emulator data files and outputs (./bin/)

- gp\_wp\_\*.emu, gp\_ws.emu: Previously saved emulator data files (a text file containg emulator parameters) for predicting the positive mean velocity (wp) or standard deviation (ws).

- lnu\_wp\_\*.dat, lnu\_ws\_\*.dat: Outputs from the leave 10 % out tests.

- test\_wp\_\*.dat, test\_ws\_\*.dat: Emulator predictions for the training data.

## Codes for training, testing and evaluation

### Source directory (./src/)

- me\_main.f90:
The main program for 1) emulator training and testing, and 2) predictions using OpenIFS data.

- me\_emulator\_\*.f90:
Different emulators (see above for the training data).

- me\_gp.f90, me\_util.f90:
Functions needed for the emulators. Note: me_util.f90 requires dgesv from LAPACK - Linear Algebra PACKage!

- me\_training.f90, me\_optim.f90:
Functions only needed to train the emulators. Note: emulator training and testing requires nlopt library!

- me\_ifs\_day.f90, me\_ifs\_sample.f90:
Functions for running an emulator for OpenIFS offline data. Note: sample\_dataset\_all.nc is the only dataset provided!

### Compilation and running the code

- Edit me_main.f90 if needed.

- Edit ./bin/Makefile and ./obj/Makefile if needed.

- To compile, move to ./bin/ and type Make with an emulator name, for example, "Make j25".

- Run the code, for example, "./gp.j25".

### OpenIFS sample

The sample dataset (./data/sample\_dataset\_all_part.nc) contains part ot the original 363000 randomly sampled cloudy columns from an OpenIFS run.

## Publications
- Ahola, J., Raatikainen, T., Alper, M. E., Keskinen, J.-P., Kokkola, H., Kukkurainen, A., Lipponen, A., Liu, J., Nordling, K., Partanen, A.-I., Romakkaniemi, S., Raisanen, P., Tonttila, J., and Korhonen, H.: Technical note: Parameterising cloud base updraft velocity of marine stratocumuli, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 22, 4523-4537, https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-22-4523-2022, 2022.

- Nordling, K., Keskinen, J.-P., Romakkaniemi, S., Kokkola, H., Raisanen, P., Lipponen, A., Partanen, A.-I., Ahola, J., Tonttila, J., Alper, M. E., Korhonen, H., and Raatikainen, T.: Technical note: Emulation of a large-eddy simulator for stratocumulus clouds in a general circulation model, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 24, 869-890, https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-24-869-2024, 2024. 
